The title of this talk
might seem a little odd, to even use the phrase machine life
might seem a little presumptuous. Can machines actually be alive? This is a conversation that people
have had for a long time, and it's a theme that's going to play into a
lot of our discussions about how to model the human mind or living minds through
the use of machines, primarily computers. When I say this is an old conversation, the ancients actually wrote and
talked about the allure of machines that could
behave in life like ways. In the Iliad by Homer,
there is a description for example of the god of technology,
Hephaestus, who has at his beck and
call a group of machines. They're described as golden maidens
who are able to help in building and constructing the shield of Achilles. The golden maidens are described in
terms that today we would think of as kind of similar to robots, their machines
that move and that imitate human beings. It's not clear at all what kind of
machines Homer might have been familiar, with the Iliad was composed
some time around maybe 800 BC. It's not clear what kind of machines
he might have been familiar with, but he was able to imagine that machines could
be constructed that would imitate life. One of the earliest actual examples
that we have knowledge of, is the machine shown on this slide
here by Hero of Alexandria who lived in the first century CE, and
who constructed a number of very clever machines that could in
some ways imitate human behavior. So, here he's got a statue
which has a fire in it, you light this fire,
I'm trying to point to the fire here. You light this fire, and
it boils water reservoir of water, that's inside the machine causing
steam to expand, and then causing that figure at the right to lower its
pitcher of water and douse the statue. So this is a statue that puts itself out. It's a very clever device. The statue itself is no
longer in existence, but we have evidence that Hero created or
designed such a statue. This is already a kind
of intriguing thing. It suggests that people
are thinking about machines that can provide the illusion of
having purpose or human behavior. Over the years, the technology involved
in creating these machines got more and more sophisticated. By the 1400s you were
seeing clocks in Europe. This was really the the area
of technology where sort of fine-tuned machinery made
its greatest advances. So, over time as people started to
make clocks, they started to embellish them with lifelike figures that could
do things like strike the hour. The figure at the upper left
here is a clock striking person, they were called Jacks
of the Clock in England. And and
this was made in about the 1400s, and from what I know it's still operational. Over time over the next few centuries,
the art and technology became even more sophisticated. And unlike the kind of public
civic architecture of clocks, advanced machines automata
began to be associated with objects of luxury art made for
aristocrats, sometimes often in fact
embedded with clocks. But at the same time,
their appeal was just that they were spectacularly well designed and
extraordinarily life like. Maybe the high point of
the history of automata, of life like machines, is given by
the the picture at the bottom here. The great genius of automaton building
was a man by the name of Jacques de Vaucanson who in France
in the 18th century. And by this time automata were starting
to be not just for the aristocracy, but they were starting to be objects of
display, almost like special effects. You almost get the feeling that
these displays of automata were kind of like a summer blockbuster movies,
or something like that. The automata that are shown
in this picture, again, none of them are still in existence,
but the automata that are shown in this picture are three of de
Vaucanson's masterpieces. The one at the left is a flute player,
and that's an actual flute in its hands. So the machine was actually able to
blow air across the top of a flute and get notes out of it, it's kind of
extraordinary work of engineering. Vaucanson's most famous piece was
that little duck in the center, people used to come owe and art this duck. You would place metal pellets in front
of it and the duck would lean over and eat the pellets, and you would see its
feathers ruffle and then it would excrete. And this was just seen as the most
amazing piece of lifelike art ever. The reason I go through these things
is because these are instances of machines in people's experience
becoming more and more lifelike. I should say human-like except in the case
of the duck, maybe it's more duck-like. But regardless, these are machines
that are becoming more and more imitations of life. That causes people at the same
time to start wondering if human beings can be
treated as machines. Just as we can say that a machine
is sort of like a person, maybe we can also say that a person is a little bit like a machine. And as people start to think about this, it's actually a rather provocative and
worrisome thought, but you start seeing, for
example, in the 1500s, the work of a surgeon,
a French surgeon named Ambroise Paré. He was a battlefield surgeon,
he was interested in making prosthetics. And so, I don't actually know if
the diagrams in this page of his book represent things that
were in fact actually built. I'm not sure about that. But again the fact that he was
modeling and conceiving these things, is quite interesting. To make a prosthetic hand,
you are already imagining that the workings of the human hand can
themselves be modeled by a machine. In other words, now we're not talking
about machines that are lifelike, we're talking about humans starting
to be viewed as machine like. Rene Descartes,
the 17th century philosopher, began actually,
he pushed this idea a little further, and he was aware that it was a fairly
risky and to some heretical idea. But in some ways he was
intrigued by the idea of modeling human behavior
in machine terms. This is a very famous diagram where he
displays his idea of how reflexes work. So, you'll notice that the that
in broad outlines the diagram doesn't look too unlike that
Hero of Alexandria statue. The idea is that if a person
puts their hand near a fire, then there is some kind of
perhaps pneumatic pressure that runs up the lines of
nerves to their brain, and causes them like a machine,
to pull their hand away from the fire. That's, again,
in some ways a very daring and risky notion of thinking of human
behavior as being machine-like. Descartes famously stopped short, however,
of thinking of the mind as a machine. But over time even that line
started to be broached, and the notion that people could
be thought of as machines began to be voiced more and more openly. There's very famous but
to me rather confusing book from 1747 by Julien Offray de la Mettrie called Machine
Man, and I'll read this quote out to you. Again, this is a typical quote from the
book, and it's typical in that it's vague, and reading the entire book I
don't think is of great interest unless you're interested in
the history of these ideas. But it's a difficult book and it seems
like de la Mettrie is concerned throughout with pushing the boundaries of how
far you can call people machines. Simply admit that organized matter is
endowed with a motive principle which alone distinguishes it from
unorganized matter, and that an animal's everything is dictated
by the diversity of this organization, as I have sufficiently proved. That is enough to solve the riddle
of the substances and of man. We can see that there is only one
substance in the universe, and that man is the most perfect one. He is to the ape and
the cleverest animals what Huygens planetary clock is to one
of Julian Laroy's watches. Again, there's the use of
the clock as a metaphor for an intricate mechanism. So far, we've talked about machines
being seen as being lifelike and humans being seen as machine-like. And after the 1700s,
the lines between the two begin to blur even more in literature and
in philosophy of science. A wonderful example from
the early 1800s is a short story by the German writer ETA Hoffmann,
story is called the Sandman. And it introduces this kind of eerie machine named Olympia, a machine woman who is so lifelike as to be strange and and disturbing. I have a quote from the story at
the bottom of the slide there. It's a fantastic story to read,
and all the more fantastic because it begins to point at
the at the anxiety that people feel around machines that
can behave like people. The anxiety was somewhat
dispelled later in the century when the story was turned into
an opera by Jacques Offenbach. And what you're seeing on the screen
is a picture of a modern production of Tales of Hoffmann,where Olympia
the doll sings the song. Offenbach played this for laughs, but
the Hoffmans story is anything but humorous, it's a it's a very serious and
scary story. It's an example of the kind of
conversation that began to be felt more and more. The anxiety around machines as people
can't be denied, and it's going to be something that in part we're going to
deal with as this course goes on. It's reflected in the 20th
century in too many to count stories involving machines that act
like people, that rebel against people, that fool others into
thinking that they're people. The first use of the word
robot was in a play by the Czech playwright Karel Capek
called RUR standing for Rossum's universal robots,
that was written in 1920. But all through the century
there have been numerous examples of machines
that make people nervous. Robots, androids, computers later on
in the century as computers arrived, computers run amok, and so forth. And we haven't evaded
this fear to this day, this is just one example,
robots can be scary machines can be scary. I just point to one little thread of
this sort of cultural progression in which things like dolls and
ventriloquist dummies can be scary. So, there are things like well
the picture up at the left there, top left is from a movie called
Dead Silence, with a pretty scary dummy. And recently there have been a series of
Annabelle movies with the scary doll. My favorite of these is the one
that's at the bottom a British movie from 1945 called Dead of Night. You should really find this movie and
watch it. I'll make that an informal assignment for
the course, find Dead of Night and watch it, it's great. It's really scary, and even if you
don't like horror movies generally, it's not gory or disgusting or
anything like that, it's just scary. But it features, it's a bunch of stories,
and the last story in it features a ventriloquist and
his dummy, and let's just say that the relationship between the two
of them is not entirely amicable. Dolls and machines and lifelike devices can be anxiety-provoking to us. And that's a theme that's that in fact
is actually going to run through a lot of the discussion that
we're talking about. People have an emotional investment in
whether humans can be modeled by machines, and how accurate machines can
be as models for human behavior. We are going to talk much more
about this as time goes on, but just to wrap up this one discussion. We've mentioned the idea that machines can imitate humans in an effect
that's the bedrock foundation of the field of computer science
known as artificial intelligence. Artificial intelligence is the study
of trying to get computers or machines in general to imitate what we would think
of as intelligent behavior in humans. Similarly, bedrock foundation
of cognitive science, which we will also be discussing here, is the idea that humans can be modeled
adequately by machine programs. We can learn about how humans
behave by creating programs or devices that illuminate or
imitate their behavior. And finally, they're still frontiers
that are yet to be explored involving the integration, the weaving together,
of humans and machines. We will be talking about this
toward the end of the course, but I mentioned it now just because it's
an area of some interest to me. The picture that you're seeing is
an Australian performance artist named Stella Arc. And the in the picture he's
shown wearing a robotic arm that is in fact attached to
his arm through electrodes. He can control the arm by or he, I don't
think he does this particular act anymore, but when he was wearing the arm he could
control it by muscles in his stomach. And he became a facile
enough with the arm so that he could do things like
write his name, for example. That's an example of
weaving together human and machine intelligence that is not quite
identical to either of the two or more straightforward things
that we talked about so far. But these are going to be the directions
that we are talking about, provocative directions as we move on
in talking about cognitive science and artificial intelligence.