We've spent some time talking about the computational view of problem-solving that is in contrast and in comparison to the way that humans
solve problems. We've looked at how understanding problem-solving
in machines can lend new insights into how we understand
problem-solving in people. Many of the problems
that we looked at in that earlier discussion had to do with things like puzzles, or fairly abstract
mathematical problems, or problems in the
physical sciences. Those are very important
types of problems that we often have to solve
in a professional way. But now, we're moving to a
discussion of other kinds, you might call them
problem-solving, but in the literature, they usually go by the names of tasks and judgment
and decision-making. Now offhand, there are
some gray areas between what we might call judgment
and decision-making on the one hand and problem-solving
on the other hand. So if we had to judge, let's take some
archetypal situations which were thought of as
judgment or decision-making. You are in the market
to buy a new car. So which car are
you going to get? That's a decision-making problem. You have a number of
distinct models of car. You could get a used car, you get a new car, you could get cars of
different makes and so forth, which car are you going to get? That's a decision-making problem. You might also think
of it as a problem. You're going to
search the space of choices that you could
make and make one of them. But often, we don't
think of these, the Rubik's Cube
or puzzle problems in the same way that we think of decision-making
problems. For one thing, decision-making in the literature usually has to do with situations
that are broad, that are perhaps a little less well-defined than chess
problems or Rubik's Cube, situations where we may have
to make a decision with incomplete information or
fairly quickly situations, where maybe the information you might think of
it as incomplete, or you might think of it as just so enormous that we can't take into account all of the potential information
that we might have. We have to make some decision based on all kinds of
different factors. These are situations, if we
were being uncharitable, we might say that problem-solving
situations are the ones that are less realistic in our lives and decision-making
or judgment problems are the ones that often we
care about in our lives. Should we take this
course or that course? What should we major in? So having dated the person once, should we date them again? Is it worthwhile to
invest in this house? All kinds of large scale
important decisions in life get cast under this notion of judgment
and decision-making. What that means also, because these situations are
often more important to us, is that we don't have the general point of view
about getting them wrong. Let me put it this way. If you're doing a Rubik's cube and you fail to
solve the problem, you may be frustrated and
it may matter to you. But you may, in talking
to your friends just say, "I'm not very good
at Rubik's cube. That's life. What are
you going to do?" On the other hand, people don't feel
that way about things like what they're
going to major in, or who they're going to marry, or what city they're
going to live in. People take those decisions
pretty seriously and they don't take a light view of themselves if they habitually
get these things wrong. So it's like, well, I keep choosing the
wrong profession. That has a more
important ring to it than I can't solve Rubik's cube. So when people talk about judgment and
decision-making and the ways in which
people make judgments, there's, I refer to it here as a normative stance as opposed
to a descriptive stance. We're not only interested
in how people solve problems or in this case
how people make decisions, were also interested
in the question of, are there continual mistakes or bad habits that come
into our decision-making? Are those linked? Can those be elucidated by
a computational viewpoint? By looking at these decisions and judgments from the
computational standpoint, can we understand not only the descriptive reasons that we make certain decisions, but can we improve the way that we make
certain decisions? That you could see the
normative stances being important in classic
problem solving as well. We'd like to learn how to solve Rubik's cube
and things like that. But it takes on a
more urgent note when we're talking about things like judging what
subject to major in, or a potential spouse, or a potential city to live
in or things like that. These are large-scale decisions often with lots and
lots of factors, and we'd like to avoid
making easy mistakes anyway. So some of the judgment and decision-making literature
has this flavor of, what are the mistakes we make, and can we do better? Similarly, there's a distinction between problem-solving and
judgment and decision-making, and again, that's not a
hard and fast distinction. But a loose distinction between how we think of
this evolutionarily, think puzzles, math
problems, science problems, the staples of the
problem-solving literature, those feel to us like
evolutionarily recent situations. It's not like we
evolved having to solve problems in logic
or abstract mathematics. These may be still very
important to us in our lives, but things of this sort don't seem to have deep
evolutionary roots. On the other hand, there are situations in judgment that you could argue have
deep evolutionary roots. If you are encountering
a new person, a person that you
haven't seen before, are they a friend or a foe? What cues might you use to
determine whether to be nervous around this new
person or whether to be fairly accepting
of this new person? If you meet up with an animal, is it a dangerous animal, or is it an animal that
does not pose a threat? Perhaps, it's an animal
that could be prey for us. These are judgments that we make based on lots and
lots of factors, and the idea of judgment and decision-making is that it's something that we as a species, we have evolved with
certain ways of making these judgments and often these techniques that we've evolved with
serve us very well. They've evolved for a reason. We survived because we had these techniques of
making judgments. However, the techniques that
we evolved with may not be perfect particularly
for our situation now, that is, the situation
of our species now in, say, urban or developed
environments. So we'll talk about
some of these things. Let me begin by giving an
example of the kind that illustrates some of the themes that come up in the judgment and
decision-making literature. So this is an example of what can be called
problem framing. It's also an example of
certain economic decisions, and you may think of
it as still being mathematical, but it illustrates- You might call them prop difficulties that we have in
making certain judgments. So imagine this is an offer
that's being made to you. So you're being offered, first, a bonus of $300. I'm going to give you $300. Then you are asked to choose between the two
following alternatives. One of the other alternative, one of the other possibility is what you're going to choose. Either to receive another $100, for sure, or to flip a coin. If you win the toss, you get $200, if you lose
the toss, you get nothing. So you think to yourself
what choice would you make. I've given you $300, and now I'm going to
give you a choice between just take in another 100, or flipping a coin and receiving 200 if you win
and zero if you loose. In either case, you
keep the original 300. Now, a little bit if you know
anything about probability, you know that the expected
value of both A and B, both choices A and B is $400 at the end of
the whole situation. In other words, in Situation 1, you definitely have 400, in Situation 2, you have
a 50 percent chance of having 500 and 50 percent
chance of having 300. So you might think offhand, there's no reason to
choose between A and B, but that's not correct. You may have a very good reason for choosing A or B
in this situation. The expected value of
A and B is the same, but they're not
identical situations. So think to yourself what you would choose in this situation. Now, here's a
different situation. Let me pose this for you. I give you $500, and now I offer you two
alternative possibilities. Possibility 1, I'm going to
take $100 back from you, we'll call that C, and possibility D,
you'll flip a coin. If you win the toss,
you lose nothing. If you lose the toss, you have to pay $200. Now, think to yourself which of these two alternatives
you would choose. Now, here's the
interesting point. These two situations
are, in fact, identical. The one that I showed you before, which I'll go back to here, that's really the very same
situation as this one. In choice C here, you end up with 400, for sure, and then choice D, you have a 50 percent chance
of having 500, and a 50 percent
chance of having 300. That was the same case
for choices A and B. They feel different though
for a lot of people, and I confess this
is true for me too. When you look at this choice, your mileage may vary, but I tend to look at this
choice and think I'll go for A. I'll take the additional
$100 and end up with 400. In this case, I think
you just gave me 500, I don't want to just
give you back 100, I'll gamble to keep
what I've got. Now, again, there may be a very good reason for
choosing A over B, or B over A. What there isn't is any rational explanation offhand for why you would choose
A in this situation, and D in this situation. They are identical
in the long-term. At the end of the day,
they're identical situations, and we shouldn't
switch our decision merely because of the way
the problem has been framed. So this is an example
of problem framing. For a lot of people, when they see an
example of this kind, they get little bit
disturbed by it, like thinking, "Well,
what's wrong with me? Maybe there's
something wrong with the way I'm thinking about this." This is taking
advantage, by the way, of a well-documented tendency in people's economic judgments that they tend to value
more the things that they already have as opposed to the things that they
don't yet have, but can bargain for. So once you own something, once I've given you that $500, there's a greater threshold
to giving up some of it. In the first situation, I gave you only $300, and the idea of getting an additional
100 seemed attractive. This is one example of the interesting phenomena that turn up in judgment
and decision-making. Here's a related one. You could call it a
problem framing example. It's from a very fun book by cognitive
scientists Dan Ariely. I think he describes himself
as a behaviorally communist, but in any event,
here's the situation. It's a problem framing. But this one is taken, I think, from real-life, he
describes it in the book, and this is an ad that he saw about subscriptions to the
magazine, The Economist. So notice the three choices
that are being given here. The Economist, you could
get a subscription to the website to just
economist.com for $59. You'd get a print subscription
to The Economist for $125. You could get a print plus
web subscription for $125. Now, you look at
those three choices. If you're like me anyway, the first thing you think is, what lunatic would choose
choice number two? Seeing as choice number
three is the very same cost, but they're throwing
in $59 value for free. You get the print plus
web subscription for the exact same cost
that you would have for the print subscription. Why in heaven's name would anyone choose point number two? Indeed, that's quite reasonable. There is a reason that The Economist gives you these
three choices, however. They're intending for you to focus on the last two choices. Since it's an obvious decision between those last two choices, you would choose number three, print plus web subscription. That's what they
want you to choose. They would prefer you to choose print plus web subscription for $125 rather than
just a web subscription. That's their preference. They're making this
sub-choice easy for you. So in fact, people tend to disproportionately
when given three choices, two of which are easily comparable and one of those
two is obviously better, people tend to choose the
better of those two and ignore the third
choice altogether. Is that rational? Well, there are reasons for it. There may be good reasons
for it in human thinking. But in another respect, it's an example where our judgment is being pushed
in one direction or another. Ariely describes a very
interesting experiment in his same discussion of this, and I'll see if I can
describe it for you. It takes a little setting up. He wanted to see
if he could design a situation where people would be prompted to make the
choice that he wanted them to make by giving them a similar three-way choice
that The Economist does here. So here's what he did. First, he took lots of photos. You could do this, by the way, as the mathematicians say, without loss of generality, you could do this with photos of men and women looking
at photos of men, or you could do it with photos of women and men looking
at photos of women. So apparently, the
phenomenon works the same. So we'll just say for description that we're
dealing with photos of males, and there are women looking
at photos of males. In this case, they are rating the photos by attractiveness. So in the first phase of the
experiment, you show many, many photos of males to female subjects and have them rate these photos according
to attractiveness. Having done that, let's just say that you have two photos of two
particular males. These are not famous
people or anything, they're just photos
of random folks. But we have two photos of males, call them A and B, who in the first phase of the experiment have been found
to be equally attractive. So without any other information, if you were to take a new female subject and
show her photos of A and B, you might expect about a 50, 50 chance that she would find A more attractive than
B, or vice versa. Now, here's what Ariely did. He took some of these
photos. Hold on. He took some of these photos. Let's take the photo
A and the photo B, and remember these are
equally attractive folks, and he used a little bit of photoshop on one or
another of these photos. So let's say that we take A, and we do photoshop on photo A to produce a new
photo we'll call it A prime. Now, this being a
psychological experiment, the photo of A is morphed a little bit to be a little
asymmetric or the face, the head shape is a little
odd or something like that. In other words, A prime looks like A, but less attractive. Now, if you show these three photos to
a new female subject, someone who hasn't been involved in the first
part of the experiment, you show her A, A prime, and B, and you ask which of these three people
is most attractive? If the choice A prime
had not been presented, you would expect about a 50-50 chance that she
would choose A or B. However, the photo A prime here acts like choice two in
the economists situation. So she looks at
these three photos, and is much more
likely to choose A. A prime is like that print
subscription to the economist. No one's going to choose A prime, but the choice between
A and A prime is easy, and so the focus is driven to make a choice
between A and A prime. Similarly, if you do not
show the photo A prime, but do a similar photoshop job, and now show A, B, and B prime to a
new female subject, she'll be much more
likely to choose B. The choice between B
and B prime is easy, and the focus is then
made on this easy choice, and it is much more likely
that she'll choose B than A. So what would have been a fairly difficult or delicate
decision between A and B, can be made to be an
almost automatic decision, by giving an irrelevant
third choice that somehow drives attention toward one choice or the other. That's pretty interesting. Now you might think
again that's irrational. By the way, Ariely says
there's a lesson in this. If you are going out
looking for a date, whether you're male
or female you're, going out looking for a date, maybe going to a bar or
a party or something. He says it's a good idea to bring along somebody who
looks just like you, but a little less
attractive, that may work. Of course you don't want to tell the other person that that's
why you're inviting them. But anyway, that would fall into the category of this
problem framing. Again, when some people
look at examples like this, like The Economist example
over this photo experiment, they get a little
disturbed about it. What it means is
that their judgment is perhaps not as foolproof if they felt
it was going to be, and this is where
this normative side of judgment and
decision-making comes in. We'd like our judgment to be., if we want to put it this way, as rational as possible. We'd like to be
able to explain to ourselves why we made
certain judgments, and we'd like those
explanations to feel as though they're in accord with what
we think of as reason. This is often rather difficult. Reason is a slippery concept
in situations like this. We may begin by asking, are these really
mistakes altogether? Maybe we don't want to
think of them as mistakes. Maybe there's a certain sense in that first situation if you have a certain amount of money
or if you have an object, maybe there are good
reasons why you should work harder to
keep what you have, and be less willing to give it up than in situations where
you don't have something, and you might gamble
to get a bit more. In other words, maybe there are good reasons
that you should value what you own already, place a greater value on those objects than on
objects that you don't have. That may not be a mistake, but if they are mistakes, if we want to cast
them as mistakes, what are the mechanisms
that cause us to make them? Those are really
interesting questions. Could we mimic those
processes in a machine, or could we make machines
that make judgments which are less prone
to human type errors? Those are twin questions
about this thing. This last example gives rise to yet another
question which is, should we be worried that others, perhaps others whose interests
are not aligned with ours, are trying to do things to manipulate our
decision making. The Economist, in
Ariely's example, was trying to manipulate the situation so that you would
make a particular choice. Now, you may end up being
happy with that choice, but it's clear that the Economist's point of
view on your decision, and yours, are not identical. So now we deal with the
situation where other people or institutions can
exploit the properties of our decision making. Those are questions
that we need to deal with as we discuss the the subject of judgment and decision
making in general.