In the history of science,
metaphor has been an extremely powerful and
abiding intellectual tool. People often understand one element
of the world by making an analogy, a rich analogy to some
other aspect of the world. And as the,
it's fair to say that over time, as our technology grows,
as we have more and more instances of technology around,
we're able to use those instances as the sources of metaphor for
still other phenomena in the world. What I'm getting at is that in the in
the history of cognitive science in particular,
there's been one reigning metaphor. One sort of, you know, foundational metaphor that has motivated
a lot of the work in cognitive science. You might, in some sense, a just about
all of the work in cognitive science over the past 60 or 70 years and
that is the idea that the human mind or animal minds can be modeled
by a digital computer. So we'll talk about that metaphor. But actually I want to introduce
the idea by talking about an earlier metaphor from
the history of science. Science is filled with these things, that is people continually
sort of look to understand one phenomenon by linking it
systematically to another. The example I have here is from the early
days of the Scientific Revolution. The portrait is of William Harvey,
who was an English physician and I believe he was actually the physician the Royal
Physician to King James the first. And the page that you see is a page
from a book that he wrote in the early 1600s about the workings of the heart. The main idea behind
this book was a metaphor was to propose that
the heart act like a pump. And that was a very innovative metaphor at
the time because prior to Harvey's book, the sort of raining metaphor of the heart
was that it was kind of a brewery. That was sort of the metaphor that was,
would have been favored by the ancients, by writers like Galen,
the classical physician. That is they felt that the heart's
purpose was to purify blood and that it had two parts, two chambers. And in one chamber that was impure blood
and then somehow that was transferred to the other chamber of
the heart where became purified. That was sort of
the portrait of the heart, Harvey proposed a different metaphor. He said no the heart
is not like a brewery. It's more like a pump and
he performed a variety of new experiments to show that that
this was a rich metaphor. And you could take it very far for understanding what
the nature of the heart was. So this is an early example. It's not by any means the first example
of the use of metaphor in science, but the history of science is just
filled with things like this. And I put up a few pictures from
the web just to illustrate other sort of chapters in metaphor
from the history of science. At the upper right there,
there's the the idea that the the solar system
is kind of like a clock. So in the sort of early investigations of the solar system by Newton and
by Galileo and then prominently by Newton and
then by successors. There was a kind of metaphor that
the solar system works kind of like a clockwork,
a giant sort of well-tuned mechanism. And as I say, that's an example of
the use of technology, a clock, to motivate a metaphor for
understanding the natural world. But then once you've got that idea of the
solar system as a kind of working system. It could be used as a part of a metaphor
that is the foundation of a metaphor for still later chapter in The History
of Science where people could kind of understand
the structure of the atom. As being sort of like a tiny
little solar system and students of students of
electricity are quite familiar with the common use in elementary electrical circuits of
imagining that voltage. That is to say potential current and
resistance can be made into you know can be treated analogously to water pressure
and water flowing through pipes, okay? I should mention that none of these
particular metaphors is exactly correct. They're helpful and a good metaphor
is defined by its being helpful. It helps you to ask new questions,
to propose new directions for research, to conduct new experiments,
the way that William Harvey did. But that doesn't mean that a metaphor
has to be a sort of perfect match. And in fact in none of these cases,
is it a perfect match. The solar system is not
quite like a clockwork. It was found in the 1990s, for
example that the orbit of Pluto which I still wish I could call a planet but
I guess technically it isn't. But the orbit of Pluto actually exhibits
chaotic patterns in its movements in and out of the the orbit of Neptune. So the solar system is not quite
a sort of regular clockwork nor of course is the atom
a little solar system. Anyone who's studied quantum mechanics and
chemistry knows that you there are limits to whether how you can treat
the atom as a tiny little solar system. And similarly in electric circuits,
you don't want to push this metaphor of water pressure and
narrowness of pipes and so forth. You don't want to push that too far. It's pretty hard for example to imagine how you can treat
a capacitor in this kind of model. So in any event,
none of these metaphors are perfect. Metaphors aren't intended to be perfect. But in cognitive science,
we have a kind of traditional metaphor, which is not in itself uncontroversial. Where historically, what we want to say is that the mind is kind of
like in the strongest versions people might even
make it a little more, a full-throated defense of
the mind is a computer. I'm personally more comfortable with
saying the mind is like a computer in some ways. In any event, the innovation here
was that once computers arose, that is once there were
computers to use as a foundation of this metaphor starting
in the late 1940s and early 1950s and thereafter. People began to look at the operation
of the computer as an information processing device. And they were willing to sort of go
out on a limb with a new metaphor and say that the mind,
the human mind is itself like a computer, it's an information processing device. This was seen at the time
as a response to what was then the the raining tradition
in American psychology, which is behaviorist psychology. So the behaviorists argued again,
there were a variety of you know, philosophies that could go
under the name of behaviorism. At its strongest,
the behaviorists might argue that you really should not talk about
things like ideas or concepts or beliefs or desires or
anything internal to the mind. Because those things cannot
be directly seen or measured. And since they cannot be directly seen or measured, they
are scientifically illegitimate. So the the behaviorist at again,
at their strongest, had this kind of rigid view that you should not be able to talk
about the internal workings of the mind. The organism should be treated
essentially like input output devices, like black boxes. If you give them a certain kind of input,
you get a certain kind of output, so forth. So the the cognitive
revolution in Psychology was based on a metaphor,
was people were now able to say, no we can talk about things like ideas and
concepts and beliefs and desires if we say that
the mind is in fact like a computer. So just as we can stud the behavior of a
computer and we can write programs for it. Similarly, we can use those programs as
a metaphor for the operations of the mind. If you take the metaphor really
seriously and by seriously, I mean sort of at its
most at its most intense, you actually treat
the metaphor as accurate. Not just a little bit of poetic
license then you could make the argument that the software
of the computer is rather like the operations of the mind
within the brain. That is software is to
hardware as mind is to brain. The the brain runs
the mind as software much as a digital computer runs its software to perform all kinds of different actions. That's a very strong version of
the computational metaphor of mind. There are far weaker versions and
there are versions that allow for a lot of hand waving that in some respect. You can treat the mind as operating like
a computer or you can write programs for computers that illuminate
certain operations of the mind. Those are again,
much gentler and usually less controversial versions of
the computational metaphor. The most intense version is this one and
if you take that seriously, then there are a couple of things
that sort of follow from it. And these are again,
controversial conclusions, but they follow from the sort of most
direct interpretation of this metaphor. First, if software is to
Hardware as mind is to brain, then if you want to understand the mind, you don't really have to
understand the brain to do it. You don't have to, in other words, you don't have to explain
the mind that the level of Neuroscience. Why would that be true? Well, if for those computer
scientists who may be watching this, you know well that if you're
a computer programmer, you don't really have to
have a very deep idea about the hardware of the machine
that you're writing for. Unless you're writing in a very, you know,
sort of low level language like machine code or assembly code or
something like that. But if you're writing in
a high-level language, you don't really have to know much
perhaps, you don't know anything about the hardware of the machine that is going
to run the program that you're writing. So you can study the algorithms and
the computational ideas in software without knowing
much of anything about hardware. And the computer science students
routinely take courses in algorithms. For example, where hardware
is virtually never mentioned. If you understand the idea
of a quick sort algorithm, you don't have to understand anything in
particular about the the specific machines on which that quick sort
algorithm is going to be run. You can talk about quicksort
as an entity in its own right. You can talk about how long it takes
to run, whether it's a good idea, whether it's an efficient algorithm,
what its limitations are and you don't have to talk
about hardware at all. Similarly, If you take this
metaphor of mind seriously, then to talk about the mind in software
terms, you need not talk about the brain. You could you could talk about certain,
for example, the process of language acquisition or
visual perception. Or a variety of things without necessarily
referring to the implementation of those ideas in neurons in
human neurons in the brain. That as I say is a rather
controversial interpretation, and I think it's fair to say that
most cognitive scientists, the great majority, do not hold
to that interpretation anymore. However, this was a version of
the computational metaphor that played an especially powerful role in
the early years of cognitive science. A second thing, which is mentioned
on this same slide is that if you take this metaphor seriously. Then just as computer
scientists study algorithms and study things like arrays or lists or
data structures or whatever. Then in the same vein,
you could treat mental representations as the data structures and you could study those data structures. However they're implemented parse trees, symbols, rules,
collections of rules sets of pixels as images all kinds of
different representations. So you could study those representations
and treat them as themselves the objects of study just as you
would study data structures and algorithms in the realm
of computer science. Again, that's that's a very
interesting idea that now where the behaviorists would rule
those things out of court. That is you you're not allowed to study
things like parse trees and rules. Because we can't see them and
we can't measure them directly. Now, since we can write programs
which can mimic human behavior, we are allowed to talk about
the the questions of whether humans at least behave as though they
are running sets of rules. Or working with mental images or
using, you know, context-free grammars as the basis
of their language and so forth. Okay, so a corollary of this, the the sort of
the the philosophical support for this idea of the computational metaphor goes by the name of functionalism. Actually, I think there's a few
different uses of the word functionalism in philosophy. But this is a particular one that
applies to cognitive science. So I'm just going to
read off the slide here. It's generally summarized as the notion
that mental states are characterized according to their causal roles
in a system of mental states. In particular, doesn't matter in what physical substance
these states have to be embodied. There's a resonance here again with
the notion of a computer program. It doesn't matter whether the program
happens to be rewritten for a Macintosh or cry or whatever
the essential program remains the same. So the idea of functionalism
is that you need that you can, you can study things like the mind
as a working system of rules, states, computational elements. And what's important is how those
things work together as a system, but it doesn't particularly
matter what physical machinery or substrate those things are implemented in. Again, that this is just a another
sort of fancy philosophical way of describing the strongest version of
the computational metaphor of mind. As we talk about the variety of
research efforts in cognitive science, we will also talk about the strengths and
limitations and possible futures of this
overall computational metaphor. The story of the computational metaphor
of mind is not by any means finished but it's been an interesting saga. And we're going to be talking about
both the criticisms of that idea and where that idea has had its
own kinds of successes.